The South African Revenue Service (SARS) has urged the public to rather make use of its eFiling platform rather than to visit branches as South Africa continues its efforts to stop the spread of the Coronavirus (COVID-19). “The South African Revenue Service is balancing its responsibility to protect both our employees and our taxpayers as well as remain focussed and committed to serving the public and continue with our revenue collection,” it said on Tuesday. In a letter addressed to taxpayers, the revenue service said that while it will continue with its operations, it has implemented several stringent measures to curb the spread of the COVID-19. This, it said, was in alignment with the address made to the nation by President Cyril Ramaphosa on Sunday. In his address, President Ramaphosa declared COVID-19 as a national disaster. “The President calls on all of us as South Africans for an extraordinary response and as SARS we are taking this opportunity at all times to provide clarity and certainty to our taxpayers in how we move forward in terms of our service offerings. “As SARS, we have to balance the important work we do to collect revenue, facilitate service to taxpayers, travelers and traders, whilst at the same time taking reasonable measures to protect ourselves as SARS officials and yourselves as citizens of the Republic,” said SARS Commissioner Edward Kieswetter in the letter. The revenue service will adhere to strict general hygiene as well as social distancing to reduce the spread of the COVID-19. SARS has implemented the following changes: Social distancing Service related matters Ports of entry If people need to visit, or pass through a port of entry, SARS customs officials will also follow similar hygiene practices and in addition: “During these times, please be assured that we aim to provide continuity of the necessary engagement with taxpayers and traders whilst balancing the risk of the Coronavirus from spreading through the various measures to protect our staff as well as yourselves. All our key stakeholders are being engaged and we are in collaboration to align and focus,” said the Commissioner. Tax obligation With these measures in place, SARS reminded taxpayers of their obligation. “With all of these measures in place, we need to however take cognisance of the fact that your duties as taxpayer remain and all outstanding tax returns are still due before the 31st of March 2020. “As SARS we remain determined to safeguard the public’s confidence in our tax administration system during these unprecedented times. Collectively, we will ensure that the tax administration system of our Republic remains operational.” - SAnews.gov.za 