The Basic Education Department has confirmed that although schools officially close on Wednesday, 18 March 2020, in terms of the Cabinet decision taken on Sunday, teachers will continue to work until Friday, 20 March 2020. On Sunday, President Cyril Ramaphosa declared the Coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak a national disaster and announced the closure of schools to combat transmission of the virus. “The Council of Education Ministers (CEM) instructed heads of education departments to develop an implementation plan that would include a curriculum catch up plan. In order to achieve this objective teachers would have to work as normal in terms of the approved school calendar. “It was also agreed that staff would be staying until Friday to finalise the administration,” said the department. Mathanzima Mweli, the Department’s Director-General said Heads of Education discussed the implications of the Cabinet decision and agreed that the best way forward is to send learners home and allow teachers the space needed to plan for the reopening of schools which is scheduled for 14 April 2020. “We are grateful that our teachers have heeded the call because they understand the circumstances we are working under and that the curriculum implementation remains our priority,” said the Director-General. The DBE will support provinces to put in place a comprehensive recovery plan to mitigate against the 10 days that will be lost as a result of the early close of schools. School nutrition On the school nutrition programme, Minister Angie Motshekga noted questions regarding learners benefiting from the school nutrition programme and the plans during school closures. “The concern is valid however schools were due to close anyway on Friday so parents and guardians were always going to continue with their responsibilities over their children. The nutrition provides meals to learners in school. We are working on revising the school calendar to ensure that the 10 days are recovered so that nobody is compromised in anyway,” said the Minister. Motshekga repeated her appeal to parents to keep their children at home and to support them with school work during the long period of school closures. “The department will continue to monitor the situation and advise accordingly should there be new developments on the matter of the Coronavirus,” said the department. All schools including early childhood centres, private and public as well as boarding and special schools are affected by the Cabinet decision. – SAnews.gov.za