As March marks Human Rights Month, government has reiterated its unwavering commitment to advancing and protecting human rights. “Government is enjoined by the Constitution to advance and to protect, without fear or favour, people's democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom in the execution of its mandate,” the Department of Arts and Culture said. The department said government views Human Rights Day as a day of reflection by all people on progress made in entrenching human rights and recommit to doing everything possible to deepen these rights for all. The 1960s were characterised by systematic defiance, and protest against apartheid and racism across the country. On 21 March 1960, the community of Sharpeville and Langa townships, like their fellow compatriots across the country, embarked on a march to protest against pass laws. “The apartheid police shot and killed 69 of the protesters at Sharpeville, many of them shot while fleeing. Many other people were killed in other parts of the country. The tragedy came to be known as the Sharpeville Massacre, and it exposed the apartheid government’s deliberate violation of human rights to the world,” the department said. The Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture, Nathi Mthethwa, said these painful events from the past are a constant reminder that many paid the ultimate price for a society governed by human rights and dignity for all. “Since 1994, the democratic government sought to use these painful chapters of our past to unify South Africans. During this month and beyond, let us honour the heroes and heroines who suffered and died for justice and freedom in Sharpeville and Langa in 1960. “Their selfless and courageous struggle for freedom and an end to pervasive human right abuses of the apartheid government immensely contributed to the attainment of freedom in 1994,” Mthethwa said. Since the advent of the new democratic dispensation, the country has made significant progress in advancing fundamental human rights and stabilising racial tensions. “However, much of South Africa’s challenges on human rights and inequality are still reflected in racial, class and gender fault-lines. High unemployment remains a serious challenge, not only in terms of economic development, but also raises security issues. “The majority of perpetrators of crimes such as rape, murder, aggravated assault, armed robbery etc. is presumed to be the youth, and this is linked to lack of economic opportunities such as employment and low skills levels,” the department said. The 2020 Human Rights Day Commemoration will take place on Saturday, 21 March 2020 at the Colesberg Sports Complex, Umsombomvu Local Municipality in the Northern Cape Province. The event will be celebrated under the theme, ‘The Year of unity, socio-economic renewal and nation building’. Below are some of the 2020 Human Rights Month build-up activities taking place across the country: –     SAnews.gov.za