Trade, Industry and Competition Deputy Minister, Fikile Majola, is today expected to meet with the executive leadership of the West Rand District Municipality, in his capacity as the District Development Model champion of the district. The meeting is set to get underway at the West Rand District Municipality offices in Randfontein, Gauteng. Speaking ahead of Wednesday’s meeting, Majola said the gathering will afford him an opportunity to be apprised about the district’s development plans. This will enable him to identify opportunities for effective collaboration amongst national, provincial and local government spheres, with the aim of implementing an integrated approach to achieve successful and accelerated implementation to address the district socio-economic challenges. “I have already held meetings with the Executive Mayor, Dennis Thabe, and have participated in meetings of the District Command Council responsible for coordinating government’s COVID-19 interventions in the three local municipalities. “It is important that we broaden our discussions to include more stakeholders, as the District Development Model (DDM) propagates that there should be a collaborative and integrated approach to addressing the socio-economic challenges experienced by people in various communities. “We also need to exchange ideas on economic opportunities that can be explored to create jobs and grow the country’s economy,” Majola said. The West Rand District Municipality comprises three local municipalities, namely Merafong, Mogale and Rand West. President Cyril Ramaphosa deployed Ministers and Deputy Ministers as champions to work with various districts to expedite the implementation of the DDM. The DDM is a new integrated, district-based service delivery approach aimed at fast tracking service delivery, and ensuring that municipalities are adequately supported and resourced to carry out their mandate. The DDM is also to be used as an intergovernmental vehicle for integrated and coordinated implementation of all of government’s COVID-19 and gender-based violence response plans in all of the country’s 52 districts. – SAnews.gov.za