President Cyril Ramaphosa says government will this year introduce Coding and Robotics in Grades R to 3, in 200 schools - with a plan to implement it fully by 2022. This is one of the steps taken by government to improve education in the country. Government is piloting the Coding and Robotics Curriculum for Grades R – 3 in selected schools across the country to equip learners with the required skills for the 4th Industrial Revolution. Delivering the State of the Nation Address in Parliament on Thursday, President Ramaphosa said the most significant contribution government can make to inclusive economic growth is in the development of appropriate skills and capabilities. President Ramaphosa said government is building nine new TVET college campuses in Sterkspruit, Aliwal North, Graaff Reinet and Ngungqushe in the Eastern Cape, and in Umzimkhulu, Greytown, Msinga, Nongoma and Kwagqikazi in KwaZulu-Natal. “We are making progress with the introduction of the three-stream curriculum model, heralding a fundamental shift in focus towards more vocational and technical education. “Various technical vocational specialisations have already been introduced in 550 schools and 67 schools are now piloting the occupational stream,” President Ramaphosa said. He said through bilateral student scholarship agreements, government has signed with other countries, government is steadily building a substantial cohort of young people who go overseas each year for training in critical skills. “We have seen the impact this can have with the Nelson Mandela Fidel Castro Medical Training Programme in Cuba which has produced over 1 200 medical doctors and a further 640 students are expected to graduate in December 2020,” President Ramaphosa said. President Ramaphosa also mentioned that government has decided to establish a new University of Science and Innovation in Ekurhuleni. “Ekurhuleni is the only metro in our country that does not have a university. This will enable young people in that metro to be trained in high-impact and cutting-edge technological innovation for current and future industries,” President Ramaphosa said. The President said various technical vocational specialisations have already been introduced in 550 schools and 67 schools are now piloting the occupational stream. Government has introduced new technology subjects and specialisation, including Technical Mathematics and Technical Sciences, Maritime Sciences, Aviation Studies, Mining Sciences and Aquaponics. – SAnews.gov.za