The re-banning of alcohol has been tabled before the National Coronavirus Command Council (NCCC) to consider, this as the country scrambles to find more beds in hospitals as the number of COVID-19 patients increases daily. Speaking at the Tshwane District Hospital in Pretoria, Health Minister, Dr Zweli Mkhize, said hospital causality rooms have been overloaded since alcohol restrictions were relaxed under lockdown level 3. “[Before] there were more beds that were open; there was less pressure in the ICUs and so on. We have now been receiving - in this hospital and many other hospitals - a lot of complaints that the alcohol-related trauma is causing a lot of pressure amongst our people,” he explained. According to Mkhize, studies have shown that the loosening of Coronavirus restrictions, including the alcohol sales, has resulted in 40% to 50% increase in people who need care in causality wards and theatres while overburdening the staff. Meanwhile, research suggests that there has been a 200% increase in trauma patients in Intensive Care Units (ICUs). “People come in with stab wounds, gunshots, some of those involved in accidents. We found that a good percentage of them have a higher level of alcohol content in their system. It’s not theory, but facts for us.” He has described this as “debilitating” since this could be avoided. “We have therefore tabled this issue as a matter that the National Coronavirus Command Council must consider because we think, while we’re going through this situation, it is a matter that has to be looked at,” he said. He said the council will be able to guide as to how best to deal with this particular issue. “We hope that once those are decided we’ll be able to get some relief or support of some sort at that level.” He believes the public needs to be cognisant of this thorny issue as the number of COVID-19 cases spike. South Africa reported a record of 13 674 new cases on Thursday, bringing the total to 238 339 infections. Meanwhile, Gauteng, which is now the epicentre, also hit new highs in daily cases, with 6 531 additional infections in the last 24 hours, with a tally of 81 546 cases. More beds needed in Gauteng The department is working around the clock to procure more field hospital beds as the infections increase. In addition to the close to 2 000 procured beds for field hospitals, the department is adding a further 250 beds in all the health facilities to match up the daily admissions in Gauteng. Meanwhile, they are working supplying about 1 000 oxygen points at Nasrec field hospital. Also, government will be receiving 20 000 ventilators from the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) that will be distributed in various hospitals this month. Local doctors have already started using dexamethasone to treat some patients, which the Minister says, is readily available and easy to administer. More infections expected “The numbers are increasing; we are right in the storm,” he warned. He said the worst is far from over and predicted that KwaZulu-Natal will soon experience a surge in COVID-19 cases. “During the lockdown, we reduced a huge number of infections. On its own the lockdown could not stop person-to-person transmission, and therefore, we saw the numbers continue to increase.” However, as more economic activities open up, the infections will go up. “That number of increase, we’re going to see it more in the number of a couple of weeks because more activity now means more people are going to be exposed.” However, he has assured the public that government is working on the containment of the spread of the virus. “We have to co-exist with the virus and we need to learn new ways on how to cope. We take lessons from various countries and we need to ensure that everyone puts on a mask and everyone sanitises or wash their hands, implement cough etiquette as well as social distancing.” Meanwhile, he has called for screening to continue in public spaces such as taxi ranks. Mkhize said these are the fundamentals to fight the pandemic. “We can reduce the spread if we keep the behaviour that way and this is how we’re going to live our lives.” – SAnews.gov.za