The Expropriation Bill 2020 has been submitted to Parliament for introduction. The bill, which is set to replace the Expropriation Act of 1975 that is inconsistent with the Constitution, was gazetted on 09 October 2020. The bill is part of the work of government in ensuring that a comprehensive land redistribution for agricultural purpose, human settlements and industrial development is implemented. Announcing the publishing of the Expropriation Bill of 2020 during an Inter-Ministerial Committee on land Reform media briefing held in Pretoria on Sunday, Deputy President David Mabuza said that the publication of this important bill is a cogent indication that government is indeed at work to realise redress and fulfil the aspirations of the people to have an equitable society. “It is a recognition of the urgency required to address the injustices of the past and restore land rights in a responsible manner, whilst ensuring that food security is maintained; that equitable spatial justice is achieved; and that continuation of investment to expand our industrial base is secured,” Mabuza said. Public Works and Infrastructure Minister Patricia de Lille said the bill is part of the government’s comprehensive approach to land reform and redressing spatial inequality, and improving access to services and opportunities. “The bill is part of the comprehensive land redistribution and agricultural development programme. Expropriation of property with nil compensation is not a silver bullet. It is only but one acquisition mechanism that in appropriate cases will enable land reform and redress, as agreed by the Presidential Advisory Panel Report on Land Reform and Agriculture,” De Lille said. The Minister added that government is committed to restitution, redistribution and land tenure, as recommended by the Advisory Panel. The panel was appointed by President Cyril Ramaphosa in 2018, to provide a unified perspective on expropriation for the land in the wider context of persisting land inequities and unsatisfactory land and agrarian reform, and urban land development and distribution. “The bill brings certainty to South Africans and investors because it clearly outlines how expropriation can be done and on what basis. This legislative certainty is critical as we rebuild our economy and invest in our communities,” De Lille said. The Bill states: Parliament will now follow its processes to consider the bill and every South African will have the opportunity to participate as Parliament considers, debates and consults on the bill. A copy of the bill can be found on the government gazette: http://www.gpwonline.co.za/Gazettes/Pages/Published-Separate-Gazettes.aspx - SAnews.gov.za