Antigen tests for SARS-CoV-2 detection will be rolled out to all ports of entry in South Africa with immediate effect. The purpose of the rollout is to effect the provisions of the level 1 travel regulations, which stipulate that all travellers who arrive at a port of entry without a certified negative SARS-CoV-2 PCR test result (not older than 72 hours) must be tested at the point of entry before entering the country. Antigen tests (different from antibody tests) are immunoassays that detect the presence of a specific viral antigen, which implies current viral infection. The advantage of the antigen test is that, unlike the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) test, the results are available in 15 minutes. In consideration of the logistical complications that a point of entry PCR test poses and the additional mitigation measures in place, Cabinet resolved to implement testing at points of entry using the antigen test. Government is also aware that some of the neighbouring countries, for example Lesotho, do not have the capacity to conduct PCR testing for all travellers destined for South Africa. Antigen testing will therefore enable the management of the influx of travellers without certified PCR tests timeously. An additional consideration was the cost effectiveness of the exercise- at a fee of about R150 - R170; antigen tests cost much less than PCR tests. Government wishes to emphasize to all travellers that the cost of the antigen test shall be borne by the traveller and not South Africa or their country of origin. Travelers are implored to ensure that they make the necessary arrangements to be able to effect payment at the point of entry. The World Health Organisation (WHO) recently approved the use of rapid antigen tests as a point of care diagnostic for COVID-19 for screening and surveillance tool in the community where a rapid result is required at low cost. Rapid antigen tests have been commonly used in the diagnosis of respiratory pathogens, including influenza viruses and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Supply of antigen tests The South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) has granted emergency use authorization (EUA) for two companies to supply antigen tests. There is anticipation that more of these tests will become available from other suppliers. The National Health Laboratory Service (NHLS) will be procuring these tests initially for use at ports of entry. In time, as more kits become available, these tests will be rolled out in community surveillance programmes. Antigen test The antigen test is conducted by collecting a sample from the naso-oropharyngeal area, in the same manner as a PCR test, and therefore sample collection must be done by a professional and cannot be done by an individual at home. It is important to be aware that the PCR test remains the gold standard, given that it has much higher sensitivity and specificity than the rapid antigen test. All travellers are implored to adhere to the regulations and ensure that, where possible, they complete processing their PCR tests not more than 72 hours prior to their departure or arrival at a port of entry in South Africa. Procedure at port of entry However, in the event of a traveller arriving at a port of entry without a certified negative PCR test, this shall be the procedure: “Government remains committed to ensuring that South Africa does not suffer from a second wave that compels us to enforce hard lockdown conditions again. Government is embarking on a commitment to a path of socio-economic recovery and growth, and it reminds the citizens and visitors that all must share in the responsibility of mitigating the effects of COVID-19,” government said in a statement. “Government wishes to reassure all affected people that these measures are put in place not to penalize anyone but to protect each other from the devastations of COVID-19. “Those travellers who will need to undergo the procedure outlined above, are requested to have patience and cordial interactions with the authorities that are tasked with enforcing the regulations,” government said. Citizens and visitors are also encouraged to download the COVID-Alert App which is safe, secure and user friendly. – SAnews.gov.za 